docs/model_cards/uce.md, before:

# Model Card for Universal Cell Embedding (UCE)

## Model Details

**Model Name:** Universal Cell Embedding (UCE) v1.0 \
**Model Version:** 1.0 \
**Model Description:** A large pre-trained model for creating universal representations of cell types across species. The model performs tasks such as cell type annotation, hypothesis generation, and integrating diverse single-cell datasets.

## Model Developers

**Developed By:** Yanay Rosen, Yusuf Roohani, Ayush Agarwal, Leon Samotorčan, Tabula Sapiens Consortium, Stephen R. Quake, Jure Leskovec\
**Contact Information:** jure@cs.stanford.edu, quake@stanford.edu \  
**License:** MIT License \

## Model Type

**Architecture:** Transformer-based \
**Domain:** Cell Biology, Bioinformatics \
**Input Data:** Single-cell transcriptomics data \

## Model Purpose

**Intended Use:**  
- Research in cell biology and bioinformatics
- Annotation of cell types in large single-cell datasets
- Hypothesis generation in biological research

**Out-of-Scope Use Cases:**  
- Direct clinical decision making without human oversight
- Applications outside the scope of single-cell data analysis

## Training Data

**Data Sources:**  
- Public single-cell transcriptomic datasets (e.g., CellXGene, various GEO datasets)
- Data from multiple species (including humans, mice, lemurs, zebrafish, pigs, monkeys, and frogs) and tissues to ensure diversity

**Data Volume:**  
- Trained across more than 300 datasets consisting of over 36 million cells and more than 1,000 different cell types.

**Preprocessing:**  
- Standardized to remove low-quality data
- Balanced to ensure representation across species and cell types

## Model Performance

**Evaluation Metrics:**  
- Accuracy, Precision, Recall, F1-Score for cell type annotation
- Embedding quality evaluated by ability to uncover biological insights

**Performance Benchmarks:**  
- Precision and recall metrics in line with current state-of-the-art models
- Emergent behaviors such as identifying developmental lineages and novel species integration

**Testing Data:**  
- Held-out subsets of training datasets
- External validation using diverse single-cell datasets

## Ethical Considerations

**Bias and Fairness:**  
- Inclusion of diverse species and cell types to minimize bias
- Continuous evaluation for potential biases

**Privacy:**  
- Training data sourced from public datasets with appropriate usage permissions
- No private or sensitive genetic data used without consent

**Mitigations:**  
- Regular audits to identify and address biases
- Collaboration with ethicists and domain experts

## Model Limitations

**Known Limitations:**  
- May not generalize well to novel species or rare cell types not present in training data
- Performance may vary with different single-cell sequencing technologies

**Future Improvements:**  
- Ongoing integration of new datasets
- Enhancements to model architecture for better handling of rare cell types

## How to Use

**Input Format:**  
- Single-cell transcriptomics data in appropriate formats (e.g., h5ad)

**Output Format:**  
- JSON or h5ad format with cell type annotations and embeddings

**Example Usage:**
```python
from helical.models.uce.model import UCE, UCEConfig
import anndata as ad

configurer=UCEConfig(batch_size=10)
uce = UCE(configurer=configurer)
ann_data = ad.read_h5ad("dataset.h5ad")
data_loader = uce.process_data(ann_data[:10])
embeddings = uce.get_embeddings(data_loader)

print(embeddings.shape)
```

## Developers

Yanay Rosen, Yusuf Roohani, Ayush Agarwal, Leon Samotorčan, Tabula Sapiens Consortium, Stephen R. Quake, Jure Leskovec

## Contact

For correspondence: jure@cs.stanford.edu, quake@stanford.edu

## Citation

Rosen, Y., Roohani, Y., Agarwal, A., Samotorčan, L., Tabula Sapiens Consortium, Quake, S. R., & Leskovec, J. (2023). Universal Cell Embeddings: A Foundation Model for Cell Biology. bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.11.28.568918

## License

MIT License

Commit message:

Added two downloadable links (list of full datasets used to train UCE and list of processed datasets used in the paper )

docs/model_cards/uce.md, after:

# Model Card for Universal Cell Embedding (UCE)

## Model Details

**Model Name:** Universal Cell Embedding (UCE) v1.0 \
**Model Version:** 1.0 \
**Model Description:** A large pre-trained model for creating universal representations of cell types across species. The model performs tasks such as cell type annotation, hypothesis generation, and integrating diverse single-cell datasets.

## Model Developers

**Developed By:** Yanay Rosen, Yusuf Roohani, Ayush Agarwal, Leon Samotorčan, Tabula Sapiens Consortium, Stephen R. Quake, Jure Leskovec\
**Contact Information:** jure@cs.stanford.edu, quake@stanford.edu \  
**License:** MIT License \

## Model Type

**Architecture:** Transformer-based \
**Domain:** Cell Biology, Bioinformatics \
**Input Data:** Single-cell transcriptomics data \

## Model Purpose

**Intended Use:**  
- Research in cell biology and bioinformatics
- Annotation of cell types in large single-cell datasets
- Hypothesis generation in biological research

**Out-of-Scope Use Cases:**  
- Direct clinical decision making without human oversight
- Applications outside the scope of single-cell data analysis

## Training Data

**Data Sources:**  
- Public single-cell transcriptomic datasets (e.g., CellXGene, various GEO datasets)
- Data from multiple species (including humans, mice, lemurs, zebrafish, pigs, monkeys, and frogs) and tissues to ensure diversity
- Download the full list of datasets used to train UCE [here](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/biorxiv/early/2023/11/29/2023.11.28.568918/DC3/embed/media-3.xlsx?download=true) 

**Data Volume:**  
- Trained across more than 300 datasets consisting of over 36 million cells and more than 1,000 different cell types

**Preprocessing:**  
- Standardized to remove low-quality data
- Balanced to ensure representation across species and cell types


## Model Performance

**Evaluation Metrics:**  
- Accuracy, Precision, Recall, F1-Score for cell type annotation
- Embedding quality evaluated by ability to uncover biological insights

**Performance Benchmarks:**  
- Precision and recall metrics in line with current state-of-the-art models
- Emergent behaviors such as identifying developmental lineages and novel species integration

**Testing Data:**  
- Held-out subsets of training datasets
- External validation using diverse single-cell datasets

## Ethical Considerations

**Bias and Fairness:**  
- Inclusion of diverse species and cell types to minimize bias
- Continuous evaluation for potential biases

**Privacy:**  
- Training data sourced from public datasets with appropriate usage permissions
- No private or sensitive genetic data used without consent

**Mitigations:**  
- Regular audits to identify and address biases
- Collaboration with ethicists and domain experts

## Model Limitations

**Known Limitations:**  
- May not generalize well to novel species or rare cell types not present in training data
- Performance may vary with different single-cell sequencing technologies

**Future Improvements:**  
- Ongoing integration of new datasets
- Enhancements to model architecture for better handling of rare cell types

## How to Use

**Input Format:**  
- Single-cell transcriptomics data in appropriate formats (e.g., h5ad)

**Output Format:**  
- JSON or h5ad format with cell type annotations and embeddings

**Example Usage:**
```python
from helical.models.uce.model import UCE, UCEConfig
import anndata as ad

configurer=UCEConfig(batch_size=10)
uce = UCE(configurer=configurer)
ann_data = ad.read_h5ad("dataset.h5ad")
data_loader = uce.process_data(ann_data[:10])
embeddings = uce.get_embeddings(data_loader)

print(embeddings.shape)
```
- Download processed datasets used in the paper [here](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1f63fh0ykgEhCrkd_EVvIootBw7LYDVI7?usp=drive_link)

## Developers

Yanay Rosen, Yusuf Roohani, Ayush Agarwal, Leon Samotorčan, Tabula Sapiens Consortium, Stephen R. Quake, Jure Leskovec

## Contact

For correspondence: jure@cs.stanford.edu, quake@stanford.edu

## Citation

Rosen, Y., Roohani, Y., Agarwal, A., Samotorčan, L., Tabula Sapiens Consortium, Quake, S. R., & Leskovec, J. (2023). Universal Cell Embeddings: A Foundation Model for Cell Biology. bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.11.28.568918

## License

MIT License
